Hong Kong is a great place for birds. Although there are no endemics - the land area is too small, the connection to the Chinese mainland too close - its position in south China on  a main migration route for birds moving  between East Asia and South-east Asia, particularly for shorebirds using the East Asian-Australasian flyway, makes it an exciting place for the bird watchers and bird photographers who live here - and for birders from overseas who visit or pass through on their own personal migrations.

The total land area is just over 1100 square kilometres - smaller than Greater London in the UK - but there are currently 555 species on the Hong Kong list, which is an impressive number for such a small, densely populated territory. 

As mentioned above, the main reason for this is Hong Kong's geographical position on  main migration routes.  But there are other factors in play. Of primary importance is the variety of habitats within the territory. Visitors are often surprised by how "green" Hong Kong is, the popular image being one of skyscrapers and dense urban conurbations. But beyond the steel and concrete  of the city, Kowloon and the new towns in the New Territories, there are areas of mud flats, ponds, marshes, agriculture, hillside scrub and forest that make this an area of rich biodiversity.

The jewel in the crown is Mai Po Nature Reserve situated on the border with the mainland in the northwest New Territories. This Ramsar site is an important wintering area for such rare species as Black-faced Spoonbill, Saunders's Gull  and Eastern Imperial Eagle, as well as one of the best sites in Asia for passage waders in spring when Asian Dowitchers and Nordmann's Greenshank - and the critically endangered Spoon-billed Sandpiper - may be seen on the Deep Bay mudflats

Black-faced Spoonbill
The Black-faced Spoonbill (Platalea minor) is a large white wading bird with a distinctively shaped beak-looking like a spoon, or a “pi pa” (Chinese musical instrument). The facial skin is bare and black in colour - hence its name. It stands about 76cm high and weighs about 1kg.

Black-faced Spoonbills breed between March and September on small islands along the western coast of the Korean Peninsular to Liaoning Province, China. The Demilitarized Zone (DMZ) between North and South Korea where human access is restricted is the biggest and most successful breeding area.

In winter, Black-faced Spoonbill migrate southward to their wintering grounds. Confirmed wintering sites include: coastal areas in Mainland China, Japan, South Korea, Taiwan, Hong Kong, Macau, Vietnam, Thailand and the Philippines. Taiwan and the Pearl River Delta area (Mai Po & Inner Deep Bay, Futian Nature Reserve and Macau) are the main wintering sites of Black-faced Spoonbill; together they support over 60% of the wintering population.


Saunders's gull (Chroicocephalus saundersi) or the Chinese black-headed gull,[1] is a species of gull in the family Laridae. It is found in China, Hong Kong, Japan, North Korea, South Korea, Macau, Russia, Taiwan, and Vietnam.[1] Its natural habitats are estuarine waters and intertidal marshes. As with many other gulls, it has traditionally been placed in the genus Larus, but based on phylogenetic work some have moved it to Chroicocephalus, while others argue it is sufficiently distinct for placement in the monotypic Saundersilarus.[2] It is threatened by habitat loss. One of its few remaining strongholds are the Yancheng Coastal Wetlands, which hosts about 20% of the world's population. The Saunders's gull is named after the British ornithologist Howard Saunders.[3]

The eastern imperial eagle (Aquila heliaca) is a large bird of prey that breeds in southeastern Europe and extensively through West and Central Asia. Most populations are migratory and winter in northeastern Africa, the Middle East and South and East Asia.[2] Like all eagles, the eastern imperial eagle is a member of the family Accipitridae. Furthermore, its well feathered legs mark it as a member of the subfamily Aquilinae. It is a large dark colored eagle, with a resemblance to other members of the genus Aquila but it is usually the darkest species in its range.[3] This is an opportunistic predator that mostly selects smallish mammals as prey but also a fairly large proportion of birds, reptile and other prey types, including carrion.

Asian Dowitchers
- Adults have dark legs and a long straight dark bill, somewhat shorter than that of the long-billed dowitcher. The body is brown on top and reddish underneath in breeding plumage. The tail has a black and white barred pattern. The winter plumage is largely grey.
Their breeding habitat is grassy wetlands in inland Siberia and Manchuria. They migrate to southeast Asia as far south as northern Australia, although both the breeding and wintering areas are poorly known. This bird is always found on coasts during migration and wintering.
These birds forage by probing in shallow water or on wet mud. They mainly eat insects, mollusks, crustaceans and marine worms, but also eat some plant material.

The Nordmann's greenshank breeds in eastern Russia along the south-western and northern coasts of the Sea of Okhotsk and on Sakhalin Island. Its non-breeding range is not fully understood, but significant numbers have been recorded in South Korea, mainland China, Hong Kong, and Taiwan on passage, and in Bangladesh, Thailand, Cambodia, Vietnam and Peninsular Malaysia in winter. It has also been recorded on passage or in winter in Japan, North Korea, India, Sri Lanka, Myanmar (which may prove to be an important part of its wintering range), Singapore, the Philippines and Indonesia. There are unconfirmed records from Nepal and Guam (to US). It probably has a population of 500–1,000 individuals. It has been recorded several times on 80-mile beach in Western Australia and most recently an individual was observed for several weeks by dozens of bird watchers in Cairns, Queensland, Australia in January 2021 - the first time this species was recorded on the East coast of Australia.

The spoon-billed sandpiper's breeding habitat is sea coasts and adjacent hinterland on the Chukchi Peninsula and southwards along the isthmus of the Kamchatka Peninsula. It migrates down the Pacific coast through Japan, Korea and China, to its main wintering grounds in south and southeast Asia, where it has been recorded from India, Bangladesh, Sri Lanka, Burma, Thailand, Vietnam, the Philippines, Peninsular Malaysia and Singapore.[1]
Through phylogenetic analyses for the complete mitogenome sequence, South Korean and Chinese C. pygmaea groups were indicated to be closely related to Arenaria interpres because of the similarity in the series of protein-coding genes.[7]
